Brothers and sisters, today's
passage from the Holy Scripture
is quite familiar to all of us.
It talks about two men,
a rich man and Lazarus.
Lazarus is poor, begging every
day to be fed with the crumbs that
fall from the rich man's table.
The first thing we need to notice is
that it's rare for the Holy Scripture
to mention someone's personal name.
Here it mentions the name Lazarus.
We don't know who the rich man
is, but we know Lazarus's name.
So, if in the Holy Scripture Jesus
highlighted the name Lazarus, it means
that God cares so much about him that
He mentions him personally by name.
How often do we forget that
we received a name at baptism?
And in the Holy Scripture, it
says in one place, I have called
you by name, you are mine.
Well, you know, it continues further.
Each of us has a name, and God
knows us just as He knows Lazarus.
But here, He wants to emphasize even more
the closeness to Lazarus, because he is
the one who begs and literally survives.
He is by the rich man's
table, feeding on crumbs.
You have to understand that at that
time, the description of this rich
man says that he enjoyed feasting
every day and wore expensive clothes.
So, in their culture at that time,
when something greasy was eaten,
hands would be cleaned with bread.
And then that bread would be thrown
under the table for the dogs to eat.
And this poor Lazar only wanted
to live off that bread, those
crumbs that even the dogs ate.
Now, the first thing I want
everyone to notice tonight is this.
So it says here that it wasn't just
once, Lazar constantly comes to his door.
He's always there, waiting.
What would you think?
You come to a church once, beg, no
one gives you anything, you come a
second time, you'd probably be tempted
to say, "I'll go to another church,
maybe they're more generous." It's very
interesting that Lazar is persistent.
He doesn't change location, he
doesn't go knocking on other doors.
He persistently stands there, and probably
every day when he comes, he thinks maybe
this rich man will change his mind.
Now, on the other hand, imagine how
many opportunities this rich man
missed to feed this poor Lazarus.
And now we can immediately see an
interesting fact, which is that
this rich man still had his role.
God blessed him well, in Jewish
times wealth and prosperity
were considered God's blessing.
But, God gives him a mission.
This passage of the Gospel does not
describe anywhere that this rich man ended
up in hell because of some other sin.
It doesn't say he killed anyone,
it doesn't say he was a fornicator,
it doesn't say he deceived or
stole from anyone, no other sin.
And he ends up in the torments of hell.
How come?
You see, God blessed him to be rich,
but He also gave him a mission.
And his mission was to
feed the hungry Lazarus.
Now imagine how many times that
rich man missed the opportunity
right at his doorstep to make that
poor Lazarus happy and to feed him.
And when we see why he ended
up in the torments of hell.
If not, no other sins are mentioned.
So he ended up there because
of the sin of omission.
This means that each of us,
dear believers, has a mission.
Lazar was given the mission to perform an
act of love by feeding this poor Lazarus.
So, this is about the sin of omission,
the sin of love, and the sin of
mercy because he lacked compassion.
So maybe he, when you look at it
realistically, maybe he didn't notice.
Maybe it wasn't intentional malice
that he didn't want to feed him.
But still, he didn't notice.
He didn't have a sense for him.
What about us, dear believers?
Do we always have a sense of
the mission we are chosen for?
Do we know exactly what we need to do?
Maybe some Lazarus, or a female Lazarus,
stands next to us every day as well.
And maybe we don't notice.
Let's be clear when we listen to
this, none of us here is overly rich.
And to suddenly dismiss it and
say, look, this gospel today
doesn't concern me, I'm not rich.
No one here, I believe, has never made
a gesture of love towards someone poor.
Surely, you have helped someone,
given alms, volunteered, you have
certainly done something for someone.
But we cannot be immune to
those Lazars who are beside us.
We admire, we highlight great examples.
We will say, look, when we talk about
war, we will say, look, this soldier
gave his life, fought for five years.
We appreciate that, we respect it.
When we hear about a missionary
in Africa for 20, 15 years, we'll
say, wow, hats off, I couldn't
do it, truly a great project.
And so many times we see and admire
those big projects, those grand
gestures that individuals undertake.
Today, we all watched on TV the
scene of those astronauts who were
lost in space for two hundred and
something days and have now returned
to Earth, truly a great thing.
A great sacrifice, they surely researched
for the betterment of humanity and so on.
And then we disconnect and
say, okay, we admire big
projects, but that's not for me.
But does God call us to do similar things?
Does God call us to do
only those big things?
No.
God calls us, through this Gospel
today, to do small and simple things.
Let's start with our social life.
Just think, you go to handle some
documents and you come across a kind
woman working there who has love and
guides you to the right address, and
doesn't just dismiss you saying you're
missing this document, but nicely
explains what exactly you need to do.
Imagine you young people when you see
an elderly person on the tram, you
get up and say, please sit, instead of
putting on your headphones and tuning
out, looking outside and pretending
not to notice a pregnant woman or a
sick grandmother standing next to you.
You see, those are the
little Lazaruses around us.
There are many things we could do
for our society and feed people.
All these people around us, we
aren't even aware of it, even in this
church, they are all people in need.
They don't need anyone
else to come to their aid.
Maybe, just like the rich man,
God placed you where you are to
fulfill a mission through you.
Lazar did not fulfill his mission
because he closed himself off, because
he persistently ignored and did not
notice the poor man at his doorstep.
We don't have to dream of grand
projects; let's look at our own
doorstep, at the people close to us.
Do we notice them?
I just said that Lazar committed the
sin of omission for so many years, and
this poor man, so persistent, was not
noticed at his doorstep, a man in need.
We can all regularly perform small
acts of love for those who beg,
who beg for our attention, who
beg for our love, for support,
for friendship, for encouragement.
But do we notice if we
have lost that sense?
The sense of mission that God has placed
us to bring encouragement to someone.
These are the everyday crumbs that
we can all give to others, and we
don't have to be explicitly wealthy.
We don't need to possess extraordinary
things to fulfill God's mission.
What about the crumbs in our families?
Sometimes, when I hear about the
situations in our families, it's sad.
Imagine if in families everyone
fed each other crumbs of love.
What kind of atmosphere would that create?
Imagine if a husband came to his wife's
aid, washed the dishes, or helped with
something else, and the wife did the
same for her husband, and children
showed gestures of love to their parents.
Imagine having grandparents in the
family, and you give grandpa his
slippers so he can walk, and you
listen to grandma repeating her old
stories, the same story over and
over, and you have a bit of patience
to listen to that same story again.
Imagine what the state of
our families would be like.
We make so many mistakes, much bigger
than this rich man, much bigger, because
we, like him, have turned a deaf ear to
doing good, as if we've been vaccinated
against love to make others happy.
And we all know that we will never be
happy while we are focused on ourselves.
Okay, Lazar ended up in torment because
of it, but maybe you and I will also end
up in some kind of suffering because we
didn't show love to our spouse, our child,
or a wife to her husband, or children
to their parents, friends to friends.
So, we all sit close to someone and yearn.
You can imagine what that meant for Lazar.
Crumbs.
For him, it was literally survival.
Survival.
How many people do I see today who are
spiritually, psychologically, emotionally.
Emotionally, people are barely surviving.
Because who knows when was the last time
someone gave them a word of support.
Kind words, I love you, I believe
in you, I'll help you, I'm with you,
don't be afraid, let's go together.
These are words that have vanished from
our vocabulary, from our way of life.
Especially, I repeat and return
to our family, our environment.
This Lazarus wasn't far from the
rich man, he was at his feet.
Let's all think tonight
about why we might suffer.
If we hold back from doing good and
loving, and we all do that a bit,
how can a married couple start off
idyllically and then over time that
marriage becomes hell, simply emotional
exhaustion, fatigue, lack of love,
many friendships, many relationships
because we simply lose ourselves
and don't notice the one next to us.
Whoever prays, notice me, I am alive, I
am a person, I am a woman, I am a man,
say something nice to me, do something
for me, because that is your mission.
If you have chosen the mission
to be a husband, be a husband.
to be a wife and mother, be that.
If you have chosen to
be a priest, be that.
Friend, girlfriend, how many
false friendships are there
today, everyone lies to us.
When I say they lie,
it's the living truth.
Why do I claim this?
Dear young people, dear
believers, we shouldn't ask
someone what we mean to them.
That's a silly question.
If you have to ask someone to tell you
what you mean to them, let your gestures,
your behavior answer that question.
When we show such gestures, such
love towards others, there's no need
to ask what we mean to them, as a
friend, as a neighbor, as a relative,
brother, sister, mother, father.
I will show you with a gesture, I
don't need to ask what I mean to you.
Let actions speak, let words
be silent, said Saint Anthony.
That's what we need.
And how many are there
around us who are begging?
Those we don't see, those we don't notice.
Maybe the rich man wasn't malicious.
He simply committed the sin of omission.
We do it every day.
I'm the first because I don't have time.
I don't have time to dedicate to friends,
I don't have time for family, I don't
have time for this, I don't have time
for that, but we're all like that.
We need to stop.
We need to think about
what's important to us.
What will send us to heaven?
The rich man ended up in torment, why?
Due to a lack of love.
So, God will judge us based on
how we lived and what we did.
Remember Golgotha, and the thief on
the right who repented at the last
moment, but he repented with love and
cried out and ended up in paradise.
Nowhere will God ask us, when we
come before Him, about our big
projects, about some recognitions
we received from society, from the
president, or even the pope giving some
acknowledgments to active believers.
God won't ask you that either.
He will ask you about those you loved,
whose pain, thirst, and hunger you eased.
That is Lent.
That is life.
So, brothers and sisters, may
the Lord grant us the grace to
recognize in time those who need us.
We constantly think about what we need.
We constantly check who loves us.
We are always looking at who
will do something for us.
But... God's economy
doesn't work that way.
God's economy works the more
you love, the more you receive.
As I said before, you never need to ask
anyone how much you mean to them, let
them show you through their actions.
Is it really that hard to call someone?
Is it really that hard
to encourage someone?
In the end, is it really
that hard to say I love you?
Forgive me, I'm only human.
And we have a feeling that we live in
a time when we've stopped being human.
We often talk about faith
and spirituality, but
above all, let's be human.
Jesus gives us the commandment
to love one another.
We cannot love God so much without
seeing a brother or sister in
need and loving them first.
Many of us might be suffering
greatly because of this.
And we're all waiting, right, for
that day when they'll say we're good.
Well, the day when everyone says
you're good, that you're the
best, that day you're surely dead.
And Lazarus ended up, and the
Rich Man ended up in torment.
Maybe they also spoke
well of him when he died.
The plan is not for people to
say we were good when we die.
They speak praises, as they say,
always the best about the deceased.
But we need to ask
ourselves this question.
One woman said that
someone told her she looked sad.
And she replied, I am sad
every day, I just didn't have
the strength to hide it today.
And as a priest, I encounter so many
people who are sad, who perhaps no longer
have the strength to hide their condition.
That's why I'm telling you it's
good to open our eyes to who is the
Lazarus at our feet, whom we can help.
Now, this might sound a bit funny
to say, but it's true because
sometimes I have trouble sleeping,
and then someone tells you to rest,
saying, "Well, go get some sleep."
But there is a kind of fatigue
that sleep cannot cure.
Sometimes, no bed or dreams can
reset you after you've slept.
Because sometimes it's not physical
exhaustion but a pain in your soul.
When your soul hurts, as it does
for many people, not even dreams
can help, but a gesture of love can.
So, we all live off small, nameless
acts of love, off small gestures.
Lazar lived off small crumbs
of bread and survived.
In Judaism, when the Gospel
describes Lazarus ending up in
Abraham's bosom, it means... that
he ended up at the eternal feast.
Everything he didn't receive on
earth, he received in heaven.
And I return to the beginning of this
sermon, this sermon about the name.
As soon as Jesus highlighted
Lazarus' name, it means He cares
about the poor, those who suffer.
So, I just want to tell you, be careful,
if you are suffering at this moment and
if you don't have someone to feed you
crumbs of love, if you are weary in your
soul, if you can't sleep, if something is
weighing you down and if no one notices
your cry, remember, God sees everything.
What matters to us is that eternal
reward, and it will not be missed.
Because God is merciful, God is love, and
I believe that all of us who suffer or
are in need will be with Him in eternity.
May the Lord open our eyes
this Lent to notice, especially
those who are close to us.
Lazarus was close to this rich
man every day persistently.
Let's open our eyes to those around us
who persistently beg for crumbs of love.
Amen.